---
title: Projects
header:
  image: /assets/images/StratTurb.png
permalink: /projects/
---

## Subgrid-Scale Biophysical Interactions
### Understanding
The ocean is estimated to store over 20% of all anthropogenic carbon dioxide and over 90% of anthropogenic heat, and is the largest reservoir of carbon in the Earth system active on short timescales. This is partially due to the evolution and properties of ocean biogeochemical tracers such as carbon dioxide, phytoplankton, nutrients, and sinking particulate organic matter that all greatly influence rate of carbon flux into the ocean from the atmosphere and carbon export from the surface to deep ocean. The initial evolution of such tracers occurs primarily in the oceanic mixed layer where light is plentiful; air-sea exchanges of energy, momentum, gases, and freshwater occur; and various scales of turbulent motion actively transport tracers. Biogeochemical tracers and their interactions with upper ocean physical processes, such as submesoscale circulations and small-scale turbulence, can cause small-scale spatial and temporal heterogeneity in tracer distributions that can, in turn, greatly affect carbon exchange rates between the atmosphere and interior ocean. These interactions can also greatly affect the vertical exchange rate of POM from the upper ocean to the deep ocean, where it is remineralized and provides an important source of inorganic material to the deep ocean nutrient reservoir, and the fate of seed populations of phytoplankton for critical spring blooms.

For this reason, it is important to take into account such small-scale biophysical interactions when modeling the global carbon cycle. However, explicitly resolving these interactions in an Earth system model (ESM) is currently infeasible due to the enormous associated computational cost. As a result, understanding and subsequently parameterizing how these small-scale heterogeneous distributions develop, the extent of their effect on carbon export from the surface ocean, and how they relate to larger resolved scales is critical for obtaining improved predictions of carbon exchange rates in ESMs.

Motivated by a need for a more complete understanding of these processes, I have worked on a series of studies to examine the effects of submesoscale eddies and small-scale turbulence on the evolution of biogeochemically-relevant tracers, namely carbon dioxide, phytoplankton, nutrients, and sinking particulate organic matter. These studies are based on numerical ocean data from large eddy simulations of turbulent and biogeochemical tracer dynamics in a variety of contexts. The complexity of these simulations is progressively increased from tracers that do not interact, to chemically reacting tracers relevant to the inorganic carbon cycle, to biologically reacting tracers imporatant to the lower trophic web cycle, to postitively and negatively buoyant tracers important to the carbon export and remineralization cycle. In addition to the results from these various studies, a portion of this work motivated the formulation of a reduced biogeochemical model that can be used to study the evolution of biological tracers (e.g., phytoplankton) in high resolution simulations. Currently this model is being prepared for publication and public release, however, if you are interested in using it sooner, please let me know.

### Parameterizing
While most of my research thus far has focused on gaining understanding of multi-scale biophysical interactions, the long term goal is to use that understanding to help improve subgrid scale parameterizations. A step in this process is to understand how and where current subgrid scale parameterizations of submesoscale and small-scales are deficient when representing biophysical interactions. More importantly, what physics are underrepresented in the parameterization and need to be taken into account to increase the parameterizations fidelity.

Parameterizations exist for both submesoscale and small scale process, which primarily act upon the momentum and active tracer fields and have been evaluated for their efficacy using various different methods. However, in this context, it is generally assumed that passive tracers have no significant external forcing and chemical reactions are not dominant. Therefore, it is not well known whether these parameterizations can capture the effects of important biophysical interactions that arise when tracer-flow couplings are strong, which is the case at these scales. Determining how strong tracerflow couplings and multiscale turbulence interactions affect biogeochemical tracers within the upper ocean, how current subgrid scale parameterizations capture (or fail to capture) these effects, and how best to include the uncaptured effects in existing or new parameterizations is a open avenue of research I am exploring.

## Stratified Turbulence

Continuously forced, stratified exchange flows occur in many geophysical systems, such as through channels between ocean basins, between coastal shelves and the deep ocean, and at the mouth of rivers and estuaries. These persistant exchange flows can be unstable to various instabilities that promote the growth of and subsequently sustain turbulence, which can then inhibit or enhance mixing between the two differing flows. The extent of mixing within these types of flows is an important factor for processes such as abyssal mixing, the set-up or distruction of hypoxic layers, injection of nutrients and buoyancy into the surface mixed layer, etc. While these turbulent mixing processes are assumed to be important to global ocean budgets, they are unresolved within Earth system models and therefore must be fully understood in order to accurately include through subgrid scale parameterization.

A relatively well studied turbulence promoting instability is that of the shear broadening and overturning Kelvin-Helmholtz instability. This instability occurs at lower stratification values and behaves in a ''super-diffusively'' manner through larger scale overturning billows. In contrast, the lesser known shear thinning and scouring Holmboe wave instability occurs at higher startification values and behaves in a ''anit-diffusively'' manner that promotes the formation of layers.

While both of these instabilities have the ability to create and sustain turbulence in a persistant flow, an open question is whether that turbulent steady-state that arrises is characteristically different going from one regime to the other. It stands to reason that just given their differences in behavior, i.e. overturning vs scouring, these two regimes potentially have different steady-state turbulent behavior and mixing properties and thus influence the flow around them differently. However, how these two regimes are separated, what parameters are they a function of, and how they differ from each other in mixing properties at a steady turbulent state are open questions that have yet to be answered.

As a part of the Mathematical Underpinnings of Stratified Turbulence ([MUST][1]) project, I use direct numerical simulations (DNS) of forced stratified exchange flows to begin to understand properties of the turbulent steady state that arrises from these two different regimes and tease out what parameters matter most for predicting the existance of these two regimes. The MUST project also includes several other computational, experimental, and theoretical projects aimed at understanding various other aspects of stratified turbulence.

[1]: http://www.damtp.cam.ac.uk//research/env/must/content/index.html